In this tutorial, we'll look at a new component called the perception component.
This component allows NPC actors to define other actors in the world: see, hear enemies, react to damage.
In this lesson, we will focus specifically on vision. Go to the folder with C ++ classes,
to the directory with components. We create a new C ++ class. The class we need is called AIPerceptionComponent.
Find it and create a child component and click the next button.
Let's call the component STUAIPerceptionComponent. We finish creating the class. Click on create class.
We will create this component in our AI controller class. The perception component already exists
in the base AI controller class . You and I will need to redefine it.
We start with a forward declaration. Let's declare a constructor for the controller, in which we will create the component.
We create a property for the component.
Move to the controller .cpp file.
Let's create a constructor there.
Let's include a header file with a component. Include can be simply copied.
And in a familiar way, we create a component through CreateDefaultSubobject.
The only caveat when setting up this component is that we need to call
the AI ​​controller function called SetPerceptionComponent.
And pass the component we created as a parameter.
Also, the parameter is passed by reference, so we need to dereference our pointer.
We have created a component. We launch the project. Let's set it up in blueprints. Open up the blueprint of the controller.
The STUAIPerceptionComponent has been added to the component tree. Select it and go
to the AIPerception category in the details panel. Property SensesConfig is an array.
Through this array of configs, the feelings of our character are configured. Press plus. The first
item has been added . Click on the combobox. A list of available configs opens: damage, hearing, sight and others.
Now we are interested in sight config, which is responsible for the vision of the character.
So let's select it from the list.
Click on the triangle, open the settings for this config. Property SightRadius is responsible for the NPC's
sighting distance . Let's put 1000. LooseSightRadius determines the distance at which the NPC loses the
object from the field of view. Let's put 1500. We'll see a little later how this works. The next parameter is the angle of view.
Set it to 60. Set the Debug color to blue. The next property is DetectionByAffiliation.
It indicates who we see: enemies, neutral characters, or friendly to us. So far, we do not have the
logic of assigning to teams. Therefore, we will check all the boxes. Next comes the MaxAge property,
which determines how long the object is stored after we lose sight of it.
Let's put it on for one second. The last property is DominantSense. With the help of it, the
priority of the config is indicated , we have several senses configured. We can leave either None or Sight.
Let's see how it all looks visually. It will become clearer. Compile.
Let's turn off the behavior tree for now. Alt-click on the first arrow. This is for testing to keep our
character in place. Click play. Hit the apostrophe to enable debug information and press
4 to enable debug perception information. So what do we see? We see a green
cylinder that renders SightRadius, that is, the visibility radius. We see the pink cylinder that
LooseSightRadius renders and we also see the green lines that visualize the angle of view of our character.
Our angle is 60 degrees. We run into the line of sight. A blue debug sphere is drawn around us.
This means that the character saw us. If we go beyond the angle of view, then after one second this sphere
disappears. If the character saw us, then after we leave SightRadius, he continues to see us.
Now he does not see us, because we hid behind a cube. Let's run into the field of view again
and the character stops seeing us if we run behind the pink top hat. Let's add one more player to the scene.
Let's program the following: if there are several players in sight of the NPC, then he must
choose the closest to him and turn in his direction, that is, aim at him.
We need this mechanic to attack. Open the header file for our perception component.
In the public section, we declare a function that we will call GetClosestEnemy. This function
will return a pointer to the closest actor that our component found.
We create the body of the function.
First, let's include all the header files that we need: the first is AIController.
Next, you need to connect STUUtils.
We will need to get a health component to determine whether a character is alive or not.
Therefore, its header file is also required.
The last header file we need is directly related to perception.
It is located at "Perception / AISense_Sight.h"
Go to the body of the function. The function should return the closest character that
our component has defined . To calculate this, we need to somehow get all the actors
that are in view. Create a local array of pointers to actors.
We call this array PercieveActors. This array will contain all the actors that
are in the field of view of our NPC. The component's perception function, which gets
all the actors that have been identified by a particular feeling, is called GetCurrentlyPerceivedActors.
This function has two parameters: the first is the type of feeling, we need to convey the feeling of Sight.
Let's pass the first parameter through StaticClass.
The second parameter is an array of actors, which is passed by reference. We pass our
local array PercieveActors there. The function will remember our array if the NPC sees anyone.
We can immediately highlight a separate case: if the number of actors is zero, then we exit the function
and return nullptr, that is, no nearest actor exists. We got in the array all the
actors that our NPC sees, then we need to calculate all the distances and find the
closest one to us. This will require a pointer to our own pawn. We will get it using the
controller. We create a local variable for it and cast to the AI pointer controller
, which the GetOwner function returns to us. Our component resides in the controller.
If the pointer is null, then we return nullptr.
If not, then create an additional local variable. We call it Pawn.
And we get a pointer to the pawn through the controller using the GetPawn function.
Pawn also checks for nullptr.
The last thing left to do is walk through the entire array and determine the nearest distance.
For this we need two additional variables: the first one will be called BestDistance.
By default, we will assign a certain large number to this variable.
The UE has a macro specifically for this called MAX_FLT.
And we also need a variable that will store a pointer to the closest actor.
By default BestPawn will be nullptr.
So we need to go through the entire array. We will use the range version of the for loop.
First, let's see if our actor is alive. for this we will try to get a health component.
We see that our GetSTUPlayerComponent function is underlined with a red line. This happens
because we have specified pawn as a parameter to it, although we could have just specified actor.
The GetComponentByClass function is located in AActor, not in APawn, so it is wise to correct this flaw.
Also, if we go through the actor's header file, we can find that there is already a function
called FindComponentByClass. It is also formulaic. To be honest, I forgot about her.
That is, in fact, in STUUtils, we made an analogue of this function. There is nothing wrong with that.
You can use our function, you can use the actor function. Whom it is more convenient.
Let's go back to our component's .cpp file and continue. So, now we have no error and therefore
we can check that the health component exists and the character is alive. We do Destroy for a
character some time after death, so there is no point in aiming at a dead character.
We can also leave a comment for the future - we need to check whether this
character is in the same team with us or not, and if in one, we will simply ignore this
actor, because we will only aim at enemies. If the observed actor is alive, then now
we can calculate the distance to it. To do this, we create a local variable. We call it CurrentDistance.
We get a vector between PercieveActor and our pawn. To do this, subtract their coordinates
and find the length of the vector using the Size function from the FVector class.
Thus, we got the distance to the actor we are observing. If CurrentDistance is less than BestDistance ( it will be so
during the first pass through the loop, because we have some large number in BestDistance ),
then we can write CurrentDistance in BestDistance, because the distance to the current actor is less.
And set the BestPawn pointer to PercieveActor. Accordingly, if the next time in the cycle we have a smaller distance,
then we will overwrite the value, and if the distance is greater, then we will not overwrite
either the distance or the pawn. And at the end of the function, we just return the BestPawn pointer. At this point, our function is ready.
Go to the AI ​​controller header file. Let's add the Tick function. Each frame we
will identify the closest enemy and rotate the controller to him. We create the body of the Tick function.
Create a local variable called AimActor and assign it a value that is resolved by the GetClosestEnemy function of
our perception component. I will not add check to STUAIPerceptionComponent
, because a little later we will change this logic a little. The controller has a
special function called SetFocus. It sets the rotation of the controller so
that the forward vector points to the actor, which we will pass to it as a parameter.
We pass our AimActor into it. Let's check the work of our logic. Launch editor. Let's add an
additional obstacle to the scene - a cube, to make it easier to test. Let's increase its size a little. We start the game.
We include debug information. Press key 4. NPC looks at another character, because he is closer.
And if we get closer, then the NPC turns in our direction. As soon as we get further,
it turns to another character. If we run over an obstacle, then the NPC
will lose us, and he does not see the other character, because he has his back to him. So, we have studied the
perception component. Programmed aiming logic. This concludes this lesson.